[Michael] I had the chance
to sit down
with journalist
and author Ben Blum,
who is one of the Stanford
Prison Experiment's
most outspoken critics.
During our discussion,
he told me about his cousin
Alex,
who was arrested for
participating in a bank robbery
with his fellow Army Rangers,
and received a lenient sentence
thanks to the testimony
of Dr. Zimbardo.
Alex isn't here today,
but how does he feel now
about the lenient sentence he
received because of Zimbardo?
Alex feels very conflicted.
He felt for years
that it was unjust
for him to have served
any time at all.
He really felt innocent.
He was so bitter
for so long.
He felt that he'd had no choice
but to go along.
I mean, being the victim
of circumstance
is an incredibly frightening
and powerless thing to be.
I think there's this kind
of shallow comfort
that the Zimbardo narrative
appears to give us.
None of us are really
responsible
for the things we do wrong.
We can't help ourselves.
We're just caught up
in situations.
But to accept that
it to say that
you're agentless.
Yeah. How am I ever going to
avoid doing something horrible?
For a lot of years,
he had a hard time accepting
responsibility for involvement
in the crime.
And now I think he accepts that
he really was guilty of a crime.
and that he deserved
to go to jail for it.
So it sounds like taking
personal responsibility...
admitting more control
helped Alex come to better terms
with what happened,
and doesn't just feel like
the victim of a circumstance.
So how does Alex feel
about it today?
Alex has undergone
a pretty dramatic
personal transformation.
Acknowledging that,
actually,
there was a voice inside him
that did register
what was going on.
There was a conscience at work
that he acted against.
Restored his faith
in his own humanity.
And that was immensely
liberating.
He and one of the tellers
in the bank that day
have corresponded.
She said that she doesn't harbor
any ill will toward him anymore.
And that's been
really good for him.